DNSCURSE(1)                      User Commands                     DNSCURSE(1)

NAME
     dnscurse - trace DNS iterative resolution step by step

SYNOPSIS
     dnscurse [-t type] [--timeout seconds] [-c] domain

DESCRIPTION
     dnscurse performs iterative DNS resolution from the root servers,
     displaying each delegation step the way a full-service resolver would
     walk them.  Unlike a stub resolver that sends a single recursive query,
     dnscurse sends every query with the RD (Recursion Desired) bit cleared
     and follows referrals itself, printing what each server returned.

     This makes the delegation chain transparent: you can see which
     nameserver is responsible for each zone, what glue records were
     provided, and exactly where resolution succeeded or failed.

     By default each step is shown as an indented block.  The domain name
     in the header is coloured by delegation depth: each hop gets its own
     colour (cycling through red, green, yellow, magenta, cyan, white), so
     labels introduced at the same hop share one colour.  The same label
     has the same colour in both output modes.  Colour is suppressed
     automatically when stdout is not a terminal.

OPTIONS
     domain
             The fully-qualified or relative domain name to resolve.  A
             trailing dot is accepted but not required.

     -t type, --type type
             DNS record type to query.  Accepted values: A, AAAA, NS,
             CNAME, SOA, MX, TXT, PTR.  Default: A.

     --timeout seconds
             Per-query UDP timeout in seconds (floating-point).
             Default: 5.0.

     -c, --compact
             Compact delegation tree view.  Shows the full resolution
             hierarchy at a glance: the query name is the root, each
             referral becomes a child node showing the delegated zone and
             the server that answered, and the final leaf is the answer
             record (or error).  The final answer summary and step count
             are omitted in compact mode.

OUTPUT
   Block format (default)
     Each step is rendered as:

         www.example.com
           server  a.root-servers.net (198.41.0.4)
           rcode   NOERROR
           result  referral -> a.gtld-servers.net.
           time    45.3ms

     After all steps, the resolved records are shown as a dig-style answer
     summary followed by a step count and total elapsed time.

   Compact tree format (--compact)

         example.com A
           . (a.root-servers.net)
             +-- com. (a.gtld-servers.net)
                 +-- example.com. (a.iana-servers.net)
                     +-- A 93.184.216.34

EXAMPLES
     Resolve the A record for example.com:

         dnscurse example.com

     Resolve the AAAA record for google.com:

         dnscurse -t AAAA google.com

     Show a compact trace of a deeper delegation chain:

         dnscurse --compact www.github.com

     Confirm that a domain does not exist:

         dnscurse nope.invalid

     Use a shorter timeout for unreachable servers:

         dnscurse --timeout 2 slow.example.com

EXIT STATUS
     0       Resolution completed (answer, NXDOMAIN, or NODATA -- any
             definitive result).

     1       No resolution steps were produced (internal error or empty
             resolver output).

NOTES
     Queries are sent over UDP with the RD bit cleared.  dnscurse does not
     fall back to TCP and does not validate DNSSEC signatures.  It is
     intended as an educational and debugging aid, not a production
     resolver.

     Root server addresses are compiled in from the IANA root hints file
     and are updated with each release.

SEE ALSO
     dnscurse(3), dig(1), host(1), nslookup(1), resolv.conf(5)

     RFC 1034 -- Domain Names -- Concepts and Facilities
     RFC 1035 -- Domain Names -- Implementation and Specification

dnscurse 0.2.0                  2026-03-17                       DNSCURSE(1)
